File System level trace analysis - Design Document

Submitted by:
Sudhir Kasanavesi (SBU ID: 108492541)
Nihar Konireddy (SBU ID: 108395318)
Kalyan Chandra Chintalapati (SBU ID: 108080090)
April 10, 2012

Contents
1 Introduction....................................................... 2
2 File System Traces................................................. 2
2.1 Analysis of NFS Trace............................................ 3
2.2 Capturing NFS Trace.............................................. 3
3 Design of the System............................................... 4
3.1 Data series format conversion.................................... 4
3.2 Extending the analyzer functionality............................. 5
3.3 Feature Function Selection....................................... 6
4 Testing and Demo Plan.............................................. 6
5 Conclusion......................................................... 7
6 References......................................................... 7

Abstract
Optimization of resource usage is an important aspect of construct-
ing huge energy efficient systems. This would have a very high impact
on the performance and economics of the system. Trace analysis is an
important and reliable methodology in the understanding the behav-
ior of the system under a workload. This project focuses on analyzing
file-system traces. We would be working on Network File System
trace. We are planning to enhance and reuse the components built for
analyzing block I/O traces.

1 Introduction
Traces are the most important resources which could help researchers in un-
derstanding the workload characteristics of a system. A good trace analysis
would help in understanding the behavior of the system under a real time
load and these results would help in optimization of the system resources.
Optimization of System Resources is the need of the hour in the present era
of building huge energy efficient systems and data centers. Current research
in the trace analysis pertains to I/O block trace study and pertains to lower
level trace analysis. The trace analysis at higher levels of the system could
give richer information when compared to the lower level traces and these
statistics could help in better understanding of workload characteristics of the
system. For this reason, the problem statement of the project is to analyze
the traces at file system level. Performing trace analysis at higher level like
file system level is chosen because of the availability of rich APIs and also
by considering the impact of any optimizations at file systems level would be
significant.

2 File System Traces
There are about 30 widely used file systems. Few prominent ones being ext2,
ext3 and Network File System(NFS) file systems. The process of obtaining
the trace information at file systems like ext2 or ext3 is relatively cumbersome
task. Researchers have proposed that there are two different approaches in
which a file-system (typically ext2 or ext3) trace could be captured.
(1) By using system call trace such as strace, but this would be an overkill
because there would be lot of other system calls which might not be due
to the I/O operations performed on the file system. One of the heuristic
approach is to trace only I/O related systems, but we might miss out on
tracing system calls like fork(). Such system calls would be important in

trace analysis because we would be interested to see which file descriptors a
particular process is inheriting from its parent when it is forked. This ap-
proach is complicated to filter out irrelavant system calls from the strace but
it is possible.
(2) By intercepting system calls at VFS level. In this approach we can snoop
the system calls related to file-system by modifying the kernel code at the
level of file operations, inode operations or address-space operations. VFS
Interceptor [5] is developed using this approach by modifying the VFS kernel
code with a little overhead. Not many tools have been developed to extend
this approach because it is not easy to modify the kernel code without much
overhead.
NFS is by far the most widely used network file-system today. NFS client
sends requests using RPC to the server. NFS Server translates these RPC
requests and accesses the local physical file system.

2.1 Analysis of NFS Trace
NFS trace can provide lot of information about the NFS workload. The
system performance could be studied if the traces can be analyzed. Some
of the basic interesting analysis that could be done using the traces are
finding out the busiest server/client, finding out the hottest files (or types
of files), find the most frequently used procedures. Doing such an analysis
helps us to understand the behaviour of the system under workload and gives
us the pointers to optimize the system specific to the particular workload.
Capturing traces also can yield in aiding for doing an advanced analysis such
as finding the read/write ratio, getattr/read ratio, getattr/write ratio. For
example, we can analyze the trace to find out how many getattr procedures
are followed by read/write procedure. Depending on the ratio of getattr/read
and getattr/write ratio, we can predict and prefetch the attributes to increase
the system performance.

2.2 Capturing NFS Trace
NFS file-system traces can be captured by sniffing the ethernet packets since
the request-reply between client and server is achieved using RPC. The pack-
ets which are captured consists of NFS calls and reponses, they have to be

decoded and then recorded in the trace. Some of the tools which capture the
network traffic are tcpdump, snoop, tethereal and wireshark etc.
nfsdump[6] is built to gather and analyze NFS traces. It sniffs packets, de-
codes NFS calls and responses, and records them in a text format. This tool
was considered to capture the NFS trace, but since it has not been updated
for over 5 years; we are investigating on other tools such as tcpdump and
tethereal to capture the traces.
tcpdump is one among the oldest command line tools available for this pur-
pose. But doesn’t have a lot of NFS smarts, however, so generally this is
a tool that is used to capture network traffic to a file for later analysis by
a tool like Wire Shark that can dissect RPC and NFS traffic more completely.
Alternatively, SNIA IOTTA Repository provides a repository of traces which
were captured on some workloads. These traces could be used directly to
analyze, but they do not provide information about the environment and
workload under which the trace is captured. This would make it hard to
speculate while analyzing the traces. So we are planning to capture the
traces under a known enviroment, by introducing workloads which are read-
heavy or write-heavy (or both) and then analyze those traces. NFS client
and NFS server would be setup in two different virtual machines and work-
load will be generated. The traces will be captured using above mentioned
tools.

3 Design of the System
This project aims to design a system which (1) converts the captured packets
to DataSeries[3] format. (2) extend the analyzer functionality to support file-
system traces by implementing new feature functions. (3) Selecting feature
functions.

3.1 Data series format conversion
Trace information is often huge, not flexible, not portable to work on. The
output of tcpdump would be in the pcap format, but the trace analyzer
expects the input format to be in the data series format. So it is a very
important aspect of the project to convert the trace into the data series for-
mat. Data series file is an ordered sequence of records where each record is
composed of a set of fields. Each field has a field-type (e.g., integer, string,
double, boolean) and a name. The data series format can store records of
multiple extent types(where extent type contains a collection of rows with
same fields and field types.) Typically these extent types are defined in XML
format. Here is a simple example of XML description of extent type for our
purpose.

<ExtentType namespace="http://www.fsl.cs.sunysb.edu" name="Trace::FS::NFShost"
version="0.1">
<field type="byte" name="opcode"/>
<field type="variable32" name="getattr"/>
<field type="variable32" name="filename"/>
<field type="int64" name="size"/>
</ExtentType>

The above is an example of XML description which collects the informa-
tion of records with getattr operation and also gives the size of the file and
filename. There is a tool called nettrace2ds which converts files in PCAP
format to the DataSeries files. We are currently investigating the possibility
of using this tool for our purpose and if the results are not promosing we
would consider writing our own tool which converts any trace file into data
series format

3.2 Extending the analyzer functionality

The analyzer accepts the trace information in DataSeries[3] format and iter-
ates through all the records by applying different feature functions for each
record. It then gives the workload statistics from the trace data. The an-
alyzer currently supports feature functions for the properties in block I/O
trace. But file-system traces will have some more additional properties such
as lookup etc. Our system wouldd extend the functionality of this analyzer
by implementing new feature functions.

3.3 Feature Function Selection
The selection and instrumentation of feature functions for trace analysis is the
important part of the project. Version 3 of the NFS protocol has 22 different
procedures such as NULL, GETATTR, FSSTAT, READ, WRITE, ACCESS
etc. We have observed that GETATTR, READ, WRITE and LOOKUP
procedures as most frequently used on NFS file-systems. The scope of this
project is confined to implementing feature functions for few of these proce-
dures. This could be extended in future to analyze other interesting proce-
dures.

In this project we are interested to observe GETATTR/READ ratio, this
analysis would drive us in analyzing whether the client caches are effective
or not. Similarly GETATTR/WRITE ratio can also be analyzed. The fea-
ture functions required for performing this analysis would be f1: getattr()
operation, f2: file-system read() operation, f3: file-system write() operation.
The analyzer would iterate through every record in the DataSeries[3] file and
invoke the feature functions for appopriate operations and build a multidi-
mensional matrix - feature matrix. Once the feature matrix is created several
operations will be performed by the analyzer to normalize the parameters and
feed it into the benchmark plugins.

4 Testing and Demo Plan
As mentioned earlier, we would be working on the read-heavy and write-
heavy workloads to generate the traces. These collected traces would be
converted into the custom defined data series format and the output of the
converter is given to the modified analyzer. The analyzer would be modified
for extending the functionality of newly added feature functions. The output
from the analyzer which is a multidimensional matrix is collected and the
graphs for these feature functions along with the results in multidimensional
matrix could be plotted. The graphs for nearly same traces could be com-
pared to check for the accuracy of the analysis. This is the testing and demo
plan.

5 Conclusion
We will demonstrate that the system will be able to analyzes few properties of
the file-system traces. This could be further extend to make the user specify
the properties which they intend to analyze thus giving more flexibility to
analyze the file-system traces. There are many possible ends of this project
which could be further explored like fixing the chunk size, building Markov
models to analyze workload characteristics etc.

6 References
[1] Extracting Flexible, Replayable Models from Large Block Traces - V.
Tarasov, S. Kumar, J. Ma, D. Hildebrand, A. Povzner, G. Kuenning, and
E. Zadok Stony Brook University, Harvey Mudd College, and IBM Almaden
Research
http://www.fsl.cs.sunysb.edu/docs/fast-t2m/t2m.pdf
[2] https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast12/extracting-flexible-replayable-
models-large-block-traces-0
[3] DataSeries: An efficient, flexible data format for structured serial data
- DataSeries Technical Documentation
http://tesla.hpl.hp.com/opensource/DataSeries-tr-snapshot.pdf
[4] http://wiki.linux-nfs.org/wiki/index.php/NetworkTracing
[5] VFS Interceptor: Dynamically Tracing File System Operations in real
environments - Yang Wang, Jiwu Shu, Wei Xue , Mao Xue
http://www.cs.utexas.edu/yangwang/VFSInterceptor.pdf
[6] New NFS Tracing Tools and Techniques for System Analysis - Daniel
Ellard and Margo Seltzer
http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/sos/talks/ellardlisa03pres.pdf
[7] Capture, conversion, and analysis of an intense NFS workload - Eric
Anderson, HP Labs <eric.anderson4@hp.com>
[8] RFC 1813 - NFS Version 3 Protocol Specification
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1813.html

